Welcome to Jeremy’s IT Lab.
This is a free, complete course for the CCNA.
If you like these videos, please subscribe
to follow along with the series.
Also, please like and leave a comment, and
share the video to help spread this free series
of videos.
Thanks for your help.
Also, remember to sign up via the link in
the description to get all of the lab files
for this course, so you can try it out yourself
in packet tracer.
If you want more labs like these, I highly
recommend picking up Boson’s NetSim for
the CCNA, click the link in the video description
to check it out.
It’s a network simulator like packet tracer,
but it’s even better, and it includes all
of these guided labs to not only help you
get hands-on practice configuring and troubleshooting,
but also deepen your understanding of the
exam topics.
I used it myself when studying for my certifications,
so I feel confident about recommending it
to all of you.
If you want to get your own copy of NetSim,
please follow the link in the video description.
Also watch until the end of this video for
a bonus look at an OSPF lab in Boson NetSim.
In this lab we’ll do a bit of OSPF configuration
and troubleshooting.
Most of this network is pre-configured, except
for a few things.
However, there are a few misconfigurations.
So, let’s complete the configurations and
then troubleshoot the misconfigurations.
By the way, because there is troubleshooting
in this lab I highly recommend trying it out
yourself before watching this video.
If you see my solutions to the problems you
won’t have the opportunity to figure things
out yourself.
Okay, let’s get started.
First up in step 1, we have to configure this
serial connection between R1 and R2, and then
configure OSPF on both routers.
Note that R2 already has OSPF enabled on its
G0/0 interface, but not the serial interface.
I’ll configure R1 first.
ENABLE.
First I’ll check the interfaces.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Okay, so G0/0 is already configured, but S0/0/0
is not.
I’ll configure it now.
CONF T. INTERFACE S0/0/0.
First the IP address.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.12.1 255.255.255.252.
Now, the
instructions say to set a clock rate of 128
kilobits.
We have to do that on the DCE side.
Let’s check if R1 is the DCE.
DO SHOW CONTROLLERS S0/0/0.
As you can see, R1 is the DCE, so let’s
set the clock rate.
CLOCK RATE 128000.
Finally I’ll enable the interface.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Okay, now I’ll configure R2’s end.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP INTERFACE BRIEF.
Like R1, its G0/0 interface is already configured,
but not the serial interface.
CONF T. INTERFACE S0/0/0.
IP ADDRESS 192.168.12.2 255.255.255.252.
We already know this is the DTE end, since
R1 is the DCE end, but let’s check anyway.
DO SHOW CONTROLLERS S0/0/0.
Indeed it is the DTE end.
Okay, let’s enable the interface.
NO SHUTDOWN.
Now let’s enable OSPF on the interfaces.
First here on R2, let me see if OSPF is running.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
Okay, OSPF is running, and it’s enabled
on the G0/0 interface.
Since I’m already on the S0/0/0 interface,
I’ll just enable OSPF directly here.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
By the way, in a real network I’d recommend
being consistent about either enabling OSPF
directly on the interface, or using the NETWORK
command from OSPF config mode.
Now both configuration methods are mixed on
R2, but it’s not a big deal in a lab like
this.
Okay, now I’ll enable OSPF on R1.
First let’s check if OSPF is enabled.
DO SHOW IP PROTOCOLS.
Okay, it isn’t.
Again, I’m already on the interface so let’s
enable it here.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
And I’ll do the same on G0/0.
INTERFACE G0/0.
IP OSPF 1 AREA 0.
Let’s check the interfaces.
DO SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE S0/0/0.
Notice the network type of point-to-point
is enabled by default.
That’s because this is a serial interface,
using the HDLC encapsulation.
Also notice that there is no mention of DR
or BDR, because as you know the OSPF point-to-point
network type doesn’t use the concept of
DR and BDR.
The default Hello and Dead timers are 10 and
40 seconds, as expected.
Okay, let’s check G0/0.
DO SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE G0/0.
Because this is an Ethernet interface, the
default network type is broadcast, and R1
is the DR.
Because there are no other routers connected
to this interface, there is no BDR.
Okay, finally let’s see if R1 is learning
OSPF routes.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
So, R1 has learned two routes from OSPF, to
the 192.168.34.0/30 network between R3 and
R4, and the 192.168.245.0/29 network between
R2, R4, and R5.
There are some missing routes, so let’s
move on to the troubleshooting section to
fix the network.
First up, in step 2 it says that only R3 has
a route to 10.0.2.0/24.
Well, as we just saw R1 indeed does not have
a route to the network.
What could prevent the other routers from
learning a route to 10.0.2.0/24?
For example, perhaps R3 and R4 aren’t successfully
forming an OSPF adjacency.
Let’s check, I’ll go on R4.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
As you can see here, R3 and R4 do have a full
OSPF adjacency.
Is R4 learning a route to 10.0.2.0/24?
SHOW IP ROUTE.
It isn’t.
So, think back to the lecture video.
What could cause R4 to fail to learn a route
from R3, even though they have a full OSPF
adjacency?
Let’s check the network type.
SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE G0/1.
R4’s G0/1 interface is using the default
broadcast network type.
How about on R3?
ENABLE.
SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE G0/1.
So, R3’s G0/1 is using the point-to-point
network type.
For a point-to-point connection between two
routers like this it’s no problem to use
the point-to-point network type, even though
it’s not the default on Ethernet interfaces.
However, when there is a mismatch like this
problems will occur.
I’ll remove the point-to-point configuration
here on R3.
CONF T. INTERFACE G0/1.
NO IP OSPF NETWORK POINT-TO-POINT.
Okay, let’s see if R4 has learned the route.
SHOW IP ROUTE.
There it is, 10.0.2.0/24.
To test if OSPF is working for this part of
the network, I’ll try a ping from PC1 to
PC2, it should work.
PING 10.0.2.1.
Okay, the ping works, so R1, R2, R3, and R4
seem to be operating fine.
Now let’s check step 3, which states that
R2 and R4 won’t become OSPF neighbors with
R5.
We just checked R4’s neighbor table and
R5 wasn’t there, so let’s check on R2.
DO SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
Indeed, only R1 and R4 appear.
Let’s check some of the settings on the
interfaces in the 192.168.245.0/29 subnet.
Here on R2, DO SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE G0/0.
The IP address is correctly in the subnet,
in area 0, and the timers are default.
Those are some basic settings that could cause
problems.
Next I’ll check R4 again.
SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE G0/0.
R4’s interface is in the subnet, is in area
0 and the timers are default.
R2 and R4 seem fine, so perhaps the problem
is on R5.
Let’s check.
ENABLE.
SHOW IP OSPF INTERFACE G0/0.
The interface is in the correct subnet, in
area 0.
However, look at the timers.
Hello timer of 5 and Dead timer of 20.
These don’t match R2 and R4, so R5 won’t
become OSPF neighbors with them.
Let’s return R5’s timer to the default
settings.
CONF T. INTERFACE G0/0.
NO IP OSPF HELLO-INTERVAL.
NO IP OSPF DEAD-INTERVAL.
Okay, now I’ll click this arrow here to
skip the simulation forward 30 seconds, and
now let’s check R5’s neighbor table.
DO SHOW IP OSPF NEIGHBOR.
Okay, now R5 is OSPF neighbors with R2 and
R4.
The next problem is that PC1 and PC2 can’t
ping external server 8.8.8.8.
So, R5 is connected to the Internet and should
advertise a default route to the other routers.
But when checking the routing table of each
other router, I never saw a default route.
To confirm, I’ll try a ping from PC1.
PING 8.8.8.8.
The ping doesn’t work.
So, what’s the problem?
Let’s see if R5 is advertising its default
route.
I’ll go back on R5.
DO SHOW RUNNING-CONFIG | SECTION OSPF.
The DEFAULT-INFORMATION ORIGINATE command
is configured, so R5 should be sending a Type
5, AS-External LSA to the other routers.
But perhaps R5 doesn’t have a default route?
Let’s check.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, there’s the problem.
There is no default route to advertise.
I’ll configure one.
EXIT.
IP ROUTE 0.0.0.0 0.0.0.0 203.0.113.2.
Okay, now R5 should create that Type 5 LSA
and share it with the other routers, so PC1
and PC2 should be able to ping the external
server.
I’ll go check R1’s route table.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
There it is, it learned the default route
from R5.
So, I’ll just try a ping from PC1.
PING 8.8.8.8.
Okay, PC1 can ping the external server.
Finally let’s check the LSDB.
Remember that all routers in the area will
have the same LSDB, so it doesn’t matter
which router you check on.
I’ll check on R1.
DO SHOW IP OSPF DATABASE.
So, these router link states are Type 1, each
router advertises its own router LSA.
The Network link states are Type 2, the DR
of each multi-access network generates this
kind of LSA.
Finally there is one Type 5 AS External LSA,
sharing the default route from R5.
There are many more LSA types than this, but
for your CCNA just know these three types.
Okay, that’s all for this lab.
Now let’s move on to take a look at a lab
in Boson NetSim for CCNA.
Okay, here's today's Boson NetSim practice
lab, OSPF Routes.
So, this is a fairly short and simple lab.
As I've said in the past, there is quite a
variety of labs in Boson NetSim.
Some of them are larger, more complex, more
difficult.
And some of them are simpler, like this one.
So here is the objective.
Learn the commands needed to test an OSPF
configuration, pretty simple.
Here are the commands you need to know.
These are all commands you already know.
The IP addresses of each device.
And the lab tasks.
There are only six short steps in this lab,
so let's go through all of them.
Step 1, configure Router1 with the appropriate
host name, IP addresses, and also Router1
should be the DCE side of the serial connection
between Router1 and Router2.
So let's configure that.
I'm already in the CLI of Router1, as you
can see here.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME Router1.
Then the IP addresses, so let's check the
chart here.
First, FastEthernet0/0.
IP address ... 101.1 /24.
And I'll enable it.
Then the serial interface.
Now the lab instructions say that this is
the DCE side, but we should check just in
case.
DO SHOW CONTROLLERS S0/0.
And it says right here, DCE cable.
So this is the DCE side.
So let's set that clock rate of 64 kilobits
per second, which is 64 thousand bits.
Okay, and enable the interface.
Okay that's all for task 1.
Next, task 2 is to do the same on Router2.
So, to open the CLI of Router2, I click on
it here on the right and click on 'console'
to open a console connection.
ENABLE.
CONF T. HOSTNAME Router2.
And then the IP addresses.
First, FastEthernet0/0.
NO SHUT.
And then the serial interface.
I'll just check that this is DTE.
It should be, because Router1 was DCE, but
let's make sure.
Yes it is, DTE cable.
Okay, so let's configure the IP address.
And enable the interface.
Okay, let me just make sure that Router2 can
ping the other end, Router1.
Okay, no problem.
So that is task 2.
Next, task 3.
On Router1 display the routing table and review
the routes displayed.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, it's got connected routes for its connected
networks, and no OSPF routes.
Okay, so that's task 3.
Task 4, configure Router1 and Router2 with
OSPF so that all devices can ping any other
device.
Use process ID 1 and area 0.
Okay, so first on Router1.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
I'll advertise the FastEthernet0/0 network...
101.0 /24 wildcard mask AREA 0.
And then the serial0/0 interface.
192.168.1.0 /24 AREA 0.
Okay, that's all for Router1.
Next up Router2.
Same deal.
ROUTER OSPF 1.
First, FastEthernet0/0...
100.1 /24 wildcard mask in area 0.
And then the serial0/0 interface.
AREA 0.
Okay, so Router1 and Router2 should become
OSPF neighbors.
Let's check the neighbor table here on Router2.
Okay, INIT state.
Still INIT.
I'm going to watch this process.
So we're in EXSTART now.
EXCHANGE.
Let's see if we can see the LOADING to FULL
transition.
Some of these transitions are pretty quick
so we might not see them.
Okay, it went pretty quickly from LOADING
to FULL, so we missed LOADING.
There it is, FULL state.
So, that is task 4.
Next, task 5.
Display the routing table.
It says on Router1, but I'll check here on
Router2 first.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, it is learning the 192.168.101.0 network
here.
You can see it in the routing table.
Let's check on Router1.
DO SHOW IP ROUTE.
Okay, and Router1 is learning Router2's network,
192.168.100.0 /24.
Okay, and then the final step.
Verify your configuration by pinging from
HostA to HostB.
Alright, let's do that.
I'll open up the CLI of HostA.
And let's do that ping.
PING 192.168.100.2.
Okay, we get a reply.
So, it says here, once you have completed
this lab, be sure to check your work by using
the grading function.
So that is up here, grade lab.
If you click it, it will tell us hopefully,
yes we completed the lab successfully.
So here are the configurations of each device.
If we were missing commands they would be
highlighted in red.
If we had any extra, unneeded commands they
would be highlighted in blue.
But we got everything right.
If you ever have any troubles during the lab
you can check Boson's lab solutions down here
which walk you through and give you explanations
of each step.
Okay, so that's all for this Boson NetSim
practice lab.
If you want to get a copy of Boson NetSim
for CCNA, follow the link in the video description.
Before finishing today’s video I want to
thank my JCNP-level channel members.
Recently I’ve noticed an increase in the
number of channel members, and I’m so thankful
to all of you, both JCNA and JCNP-level members.
Previously I read out the names of all the
JCNP-level members one by one, but the list
is getting longer so I’ll just leave the
list up here.
Your support helps me keep making and releasing
these videos every week, I’m really grateful
for your support.
This is the list of JCNP-level members at
the time of recording by the way, August 29th
2020, if you signed up recently and your name
isn’t on here don’t worry, you’ll be
in future videos.
Thank you for watching.
Please subscribe to the channel, like the
video, leave a comment, and share the video
with anyone else studying for the CCNA.
If you want to leave a tip, check the links
in the description.
I'm also a Brave verified publisher and accept
BAT, or Basic Attention Token, tips via the
Brave browser.
That's all for now.